---
layout: article
category: review
title: The Bible As Healer
author: Stanley D. Walters
date: 1 April 2013
aside: |
  S.&thinsp;D. Walters gave a version of this review at the fall meeting
  of the Wycliffe Centre for Scripture and Theology, 21 October 2011.
  Michael Legaspi was present for that gathering.
sections:
  - name: Before Michaelis
    id: before-michaelis
  - name: Johann David Michaelis
    id: johann-david-michaelis-171791
  - name: The Book
    id: the-book
---

There is a current TV ad in which people go up and down a wide stone
staircase and walk down long collegiate gothic hallways. I think it’s
supposed to be a museum somewhere. As it happens, I recognize where that
ad has been filmed: Knox College, Toronto. I’m certain of the location;
I was there too long not to recognize those stones. Now, the ad is for a
pain-killer, which makes me think of theological headaches and where you
might take them. That would be a comforting conceit: our theological
seminaries can heal the headaches of the world.

The trouble is, we have known people who didn’t have a headache until
they got to seminary, and we also know that part of that syndrome is the
critical tradition of biblical studies. Michael Legaspi’s book, *The
Death of Scripture and the Rise of Biblical Studies,* takes us into the
history and character of that scholarship and asks us to think with him
about our relationship to it.[^1]

[^1]: Oxford University Press: 2010.

It is a timely topic, for, as Legaspi writes, “Biblical studies have
entered a period of crisis having to do, among other things, with
methodological disarray, lack of consensus on key questions, the
triviality of a great deal of historical scholarship, and a problematic
relation to the Bible’s religious readership” (167).[^2]

[^2]: All unattributed page numbers are to Michael Legaspi's book.

Full disclosure. My entire professional life, including much of its
education, has been within and around the critical tradition of biblical
studies. My first paper at SBL was in 1961; I’ve attended a great many
of the subsequent meetings, and have published in the guild’s journals.
In time, however, I became convinced that the most appropriate venue for
the interpretation of scripture was God’s people at worship and study,
and in 1992, I left the academy to accept a pastoral call. The work of
those twelve years (in Toronto, Ontario, and later in Bucyrus, Ohio),
only strengthened my recognition of the critical tradition’s limitations
for biblical interpretation in the church. The book’s title, therefore,
draws me in.

And the title intimates the book’s thesis: the programme of Hebrew and
Near Eastern studies introduced by J. D. Michaelis at the University of
Göttingen in the years following 1745 forms the starting point and model
for Biblical studies as we know it from our own universities and
seminaries. Michael Legaspi’s book is about Michaelis and how he
implemented “biblical studies” at Göttingen by reconceiving what the
Bible is. I’ll seek (1) to summarize the book’s main movements, (2)
raise a few queries, and then (3) offer comments on four of its most
telling engagements with my own thinking.


## Before Michaelis

### “The Death of Scripture” 

Scripture died, Legaspi says, in the 16th century as a result of the
Reformation. Prior to those events, the Bible had functioned as a
nurturing presence in the church: its words and ideas formed the liturgy
and the teaching of the church, and provided a world in which Christians
had their moral existence. But the Reformation led to the Bible’s
becoming a source of proof-texts and other dogmatic arguments, and
therefore also a dividing presence for Christian people. It became what
it previously was not: an object, something to be studied, understood,
even managed, a text to be cited and to divide (10--18). Legaspi calls it
the “textualization of the Bible.”

### Reinventing the Bible

During these same decades the humanistic renaissance known as the
Enlightenment was taking place; its emphasis on the use of written
sources heightened interest in the Bible. Legaspi leaves this period --- about 
200 years between the Reformation and the founding of Göttingen --- relatively 
untreated, presupposing Jonathan Sheehan’s 2005 treatment of
it[^3] in four main developments: (1) Textual criticism (polyglot texts,
Bengel, the genealogical theory of manuscripts), (2) New translations
fitted to instruct and to teach, but rejecting the use of typology to
unify the biblical texts. This includes paraphrases and Bibles for
children, which were finally deemed unsuitable because they claimed
authority over the reader (Sheehan 2005, 126, 133--35), (3) The Bible as
literature, especially poetry, (4) Historical reference, including
travel in the near east, manners and customs, and an anti-Jewish
outlook. 

[^3]: Jonathan Sheehan, *The Enlightenment Bible* (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2005, paperback 2007).

Up to about 1700, all theological discussion “presupposed an
authoritative Bible and a stable biblical canon” but these developments
in the study of the Bible tended to undercut that authority. Sheehan
calls it “the German reinvention of the Bible” (Sheehan 2005, 54), and
Legaspi calls it “modern biblical scholarship,” characterized by
preoccupation with the Bible’s textuality, relativizing or subverting
the Bible’s authority, referential theories of meaning, and
attentiveness to the world of the Bible (25). 

### The German University

Another aspect of the enlightenment was the German research university,
which rapidly became known for the scholarship of its teachers and the
rigor of its teaching, including the famous seminar. The model was
widely adopted. In North America it influenced the formation of Cornell,
Johns Hopkins, and Chicago.

European universities had always had faculties of theology and
philosophy which believed and taught in line with the dominant
confession. But the research university, while nominally acknowledging
the existence of religious confessions, was in other ways
post-confessional, and was expected to support the aims of the state,
especially the need to unify its competing territories and interests. 

Göttingen was patterned after the University of Halle (1694), where the
government was looking to the pietists to be critics of orthodox
Lutheranism. As a public university, founded in 1737, Göttingen would be
even more free of theological and church entanglements, and even more
dedicated to the interests of the state. Michaelis’s own “interpretive
mode” involved “serious, clear-eyed, and deliberate circumvention of
confessional interpretation” (163--64). Legaspi calls it “a
cultural-political project shaped by the realities of the university”
(7). 


## Johann David Michaelis (1717--91)

Michaelis was a scholar of the Bible and the Bible’s world, and Legaspi
describes him as “the leading biblical scholar of his generation and the
most accomplished Orientalist of the eighteenth century” (5). Michaelis
joined the faculty of philosophy at Göttingen eight years after its
founding and stayed for thirty-six years. His chosen field of learning
was the Bible, but he also took a great interest in university affairs,
and eventually wrote a four-volume work on the rationale of the
university in modern Germany. 

The faculty of theology at Göttingen represented the old ways of
understanding the church and the Bible, and it seemed dubious that it
had any future in the university. Certainly dogmatic differences had
none, since “irenicism” was a touchstone of the new ways.

Michaelis saw that he must adapt or have no place there at all.

### The Classics at Göttingen

The new methods thrown up by the Enlightenment would surely be part of
the solution, but there was also a further resource at hand to help him
--- the revival of classical learning then under way at Göttingen. Legaspi
especially notes the work of J. M. Gesner and C. C. Heyne at Göttingen,
who desired not just to study ancient Greece, but to pre-empt Greek
antiquity as a guide for German society, “…a totalizing study of the
ancient world based on philology, text criticism, and literary history”
(57). This sounds like more than another revision of the curriculum by
the faculty at a weekend retreat; Legaspi calls it a faith and not a
movement, whose proponents saw it as a new form of life that could
replace Christianity (55). Under Heyne, “…the study of the deep past
became a coherent discipline characterized by empiricism and
methodological rigor and reoriented toward the social realities of the
university” (77).

Gesner and Heyne promoted the study of classical civilization as a model
and guide for educated Germans. This involved reconceiving classical
Greek culture from merely the study of written texts in terms of grammar
and translation, to entering into the spirit of that culture in order to
serve the needs of the German state. “Philhellenism” sought through the
study of ancient Greece “to recover an integrative vision of life”
(54b). Legaspi believes that Michaelis was deeply in agreement with
their approach, and envisioned a parallel move for the study of ancient
Israel.

### Biblical Studies

Under the influence of Gesner’s and Heyne’s approach to the Greek and
Roman texts, Michaelis introduced at Göttingen the study of ancient
Israel as a classical civilization, a new post-confessional way of
teaching the Bible that reconceived it not as a holy book to be read and
heeded, but as a cultural resource for the new Germany. The newer
methods of the enlightenment were by now no longer new, but his vision
for the Bible at the new enlightenment university institutionalized
those viewpoints and methods. He would treat Israel as another ancient
culture, parallel to Greece, the study of which could provide a model
for citizens of the German state. This would keep the study of the Bible
in the university. 

In seeking to present ancient Israel as a classical civilization,
Michaelis had to ask what Israel and the ancient near east had to offer.
He saw he would need to teach the Hebrew language, as well as Israel’s
classic moral documents. The latter would be the legal texts (the
Pentateuch), and (as he viewed them) Israel’s poetic texts (the Psalms,
the prophets, and Job). In the second half of his book, Legaspi takes up
Michaelis’ work and writings in these areas.

### Language

Michaelis seems to have taken up Old Testament (“oriental”) studies
within a circle of family interest involving his father and his uncle.
Legaspi deals with him as an Hebraist, and also with his vision of
ancient Israel as a classical civilization the study of which can
proceed without confessional assistance and will enrich modern life and
learning, assessing him as an Hebraist on the basis of two books by him,
a Hebrew grammar (1745), and *Judgment of the means by which to
understand the dead Hebrew language*(1757). 

Michaelis separates Hebrew sharply from Judaism and the rabbinic
tradition. It is not an “exceptional” language and must be studied
exactly as any other language would be. He therefore uses the cognate
languages to understand Hebrew better, especially since the biblical
corpus of writings is so limited. Legaspi gives two examples of problems
that Michaelis so explains, the unexpected ḥiriq in *yelidtîkā*in Psalm
2:7 and the unexpected *he*in the niphal infinitive. His explanations
are based on linguistic phenomena and Arabic parallels, and elements of
them appear in GK’s explanations of both puzzles (Gesenius 1910, §s 44d,
51a).

Legaspi calls him an “innovator” in his use of near eastern travel
literature to illuminate the Bible. The idea of the “unchanging east”
appears here, derived from Schultens, one of his teachers, and Michaelis
wrote a six-volume work seeking to illustrate the laws of Moses from
Bedouin tradition. Others had already used travel literature, but
Michaelis instigated the Danish king to support a massive research trip
to the Arabian peninsula, managed (or mismanaged) by one of his own
students, Carsten Niebuhr. From these beginnings a huge “manners and
customs” literature eventually appeared, in which Bedouin and other
ethnographic data play something of the role that archaeology played in
the twentieth century, that is, “nontextual ancillary” materials.

Thus Michaelis identifies the ancient Israelites with the Arabs rather
than with the Jews, and there is no doubt of his anti-semitism.
Göttingen was different from Halle in this respect, where interest in
Jewish evangelism helped maintain Christian interest in the rabbinic
sources, but Michaelis “...flatly denied the relevance of Jewish
learning to a historical or philological understanding of the OT” (96).
He opposed proposals to integrate Jews into Prussian society, suggesting
instead that they might well locate on a southern island somewhere and
produce a useful commodity such as sugar. Legaspi calls him “an early
representative of modern anti-Semitism.” (98).

### Poetry

In 1741 he went to England for an 18-month stay. There he heard Robert
Lowth give the second of his thirty-four lectures on Hebrew poetry. In
it Lowth promised to deal with Hebrew poetry in critical terms and to
avoid “theological disquisitions” (Lowth 3rd edition 1835, xiii). In
time he put forward views of literary parallelism that have become the
hallmark of “Hebrew poetry” in the enlightenment tradition of biblical
study.[^4]

[^4]: James Kugel has written a telling critique of the whole notion of 
"biblical poetry" and of "parallelism" as its definitive characteristic 
(Kugel 1981), one shared by Michael Legaspi (190 n 41). I once heard James 
Barr say, in a lecture at Emmanuel College, Toronto, "If I say, 'I like 
coffee and my wife likes tea,' have I stumbled upon the essential feature 
of Hebrew poetry?"

Michaelis was immediately drawn to Lowth’s person and ideas, and
eventually translated the full set of lectures into German, fitted them
with his own annotations, and published them. For once, the critical
wind blew from England to Germany instead of the other direction. Lowth
did not introduce his distinctive idea of parallelism until the 19th
lecture, but its “discovery” is foreshadowed in his early treatment of
repetition. He defended the repetitive form that parallelism gives to
the psalms (unacceptable in classical poetry and in neoclassical
rhetoric), calling it the definitive mark of Hebrew poetry.

It is because of Lowth/Michaelis and “parallelism” that translators of
the Bible began to print the biblical psalms in poetic lines (as does
the ERV, ASV), and even to print the Hebrew text in poetic lines,
although the Hebrew manuscripts do not do so, nor did the KJV. 

As an annotator of Lowth, Michaelis was sympathetic without being
uncritical. His reservations included Lowth’s ignorance of Arabic and
Syriac and his Israelite exceptionalism. Michaelis also down-played
theological interests even more than Lowth did (122). But Lowth gave
Michaelis a more profound literary engagement with the Old Testament
than he could have come up with himself. Legaspi refers to the work of
Lowth and Michaelis as “the invention of biblical poetry.”

Since many passages in the Latter Prophets display the same pattern of
repetition as the Psalms, Lowth included the prophets under the rubric
of poetry as well. Legaspi does well to see this as “dismantling the
canon,” and as introducing the study of the Bible as literature apart
from one’s “identity in a community of faith united by canon” (128).[^5]

[^5]: The oracular texts of the prophets were not printed in poetic 
stichs in the ERV ASV; only in the RSV.

### Moses the Law-giver

So: Israel had a language that could be taught at the university, and a
distinctive poetic tradition. It also has a statesman, a reformer, and a
moral philosopher, namely, Moses: the embodiment of classical Israel and
of what it had to offer (130), a “paragon of classical Israel” (151).
Michaelis believed that Moses was the author of both the Mosaic laws and
the book of Job, and Legaspi takes up Michaelis’s six-volume
*Commentaries on the Laws of Moses,* and his translation and commentary
on Job. 

Michaelis defended traditional authorship, needing “the exemplarity of
Moses” for his “project to create a classical Israel” (139), and held
that “God never meant [the Mosaic law] to bind any other nation but the
Israelites” (141). He attributes Moses’ success to five main factors.
(1) His Egyptian background gave him experience with statecraft that
helped Israel form a nation. (2) He was  essentially conservative in
preserving Israel’s nomadic ethos. (3) He was pragmatic, since the laws
are suitable to Israel’s circumstances. For example, laws prohibiting
kindling a fire or harvesting grain on the Sabbath would work in the
Levant but would not in Norway.[^6] (4) The laws are intended to promote
human happiness, and (5) to implement “an irenic social agenda”
(141--146).

[^6]: Here I miss any observation on Michaelis's part like that commonly 
found in critical discussions that the covenant laws of Ex 21--23 reflect 
the settled agricultural culture of Canaan and not the pastoral ethos of 
the bedouin.

### The Book of Job

Michaelis held Moses to be the author of Job, based on details of
Egyptian culture and history found in the book, on the absence in the
book of familiarity with Palestine, and on images and vocabulary that
Job shares with the Pentateuch and Psalm 90 (e.g., the word  *shekhin*
“boils” Job 2:7, Ex 9:10--11, Dt 28:27, Lv 13:18--20) (148--49). Against
those like Lowth who held that Job was a real person, Michaelis held
that Job is fictional and so the dialogues can lead us to the author’s
meaning. Written while Moses was “a stateless exile” in the land of
Midian (149), the book becomes “a philosophical fable teaching general
religious truths” (152), including future rewards and punishment.
Through “a series of questionable maneuvers,” Michaelis translates the
classic text Job 19:25--27 as referring to the resurrection of the dead.
Moses is thus “a paragon of classical Israel,” but “no longer
recognizably Israelite” (151).

### Summary

Michaelis, then, finds a place for Biblical studies in the German
research university through understanding ancient Israel analogously to
ancient Greece as a cultural influence with its own language and
literature, serviceable to the needs and goals of the modern state.

Throughout the book Legaspi’s tacit foil to Michaelis’ academic Bible is
the Bible as God’s people receive and obey it. He quotes Auerbach to
this effect, words so telling that I must repeat them here:

> The scripture stories do not, like Homer’s, court our favor, they do
> not flatter us that they may please and enchant us --- they seek to subject 
> us, and if we refuse to be subjected we are rebels.[^7] 

[^7]: Erich Auerbach, *Mimesis* p 15 apud Legaspi p 106.

He adds his own equally trenchant declaration that the Bible calls us to
“a way of life organized around a communal, historically rooted
obedience to the divine will” (106).

He addresses this in the closing segment of the book, asking, “What,
finally, of the scriptural Bible?” His answer is that “the scriptural
Bible and the academic Bible are fundamentally different creations
oriented toward rival interpretive communities… [T]hey remain, in
the end, loyal to separate authorities” (169). 


## The Book

As an historical study this book is convincing to me, although I admit I
must depend on Legaspi for the character of the German research
university, for Göttingen in particular, and for the character and
rationale of the programme that Michaelis introduced. Legaspi’s research
is extremely thorough, and he is skilled in epitomizing a piece of
writing and in characterizing individuals and their views. His work
abounds in details, being meticulously documented with multiple concrete
examples. He attends to the life, work, and writings of a score or more
academic figures, English as well as German, and makes dazzling use of
primary sources in German and Latin. The book’s argument is easy to
follow because of repeated summaries.

### Queries

Beside a few technical matters,[^8] a good place to start is with the term
“enlightenment Bible”[^9] and others like it. Insofar as they suggest
something different from the traditional canon and text, they do not
clarify. Since the term refers to topics and methods of study
characteristic of the period of the enlightenment, but not to a
different written work, one might rather speak of “enlightenment
readers” of the Bible, or “the scriptural reader and the academic
interpreter” (169).

[^8]: For example: (a) On p 19 6th line up, should not the words "for the
antiquity" (of the vowel points) read instead "against the antiquity"? (b)
On p 90 line 8, should the name "Michaelis" perhaps instead be "Koch" or
"Neumann" (as p 89 bottom)? Michaelis did not hold that Hebrew was an
extraordinary language.
[^9]: Sheehan first uses the term "cultural Bible" (Sheehan 2005, xl,
meaning, the Bible as an influence in and upon culture, and this vis-a-vis
the Bible "venerated … for its revealed theological truths" (x). So p
xi, the cultural Bible vis-a-vis "their traditional Bible" (xi), and then
"Enlightenment Bible (xii). It was natural for Michael Legaspi to carry the
mode of reference over to his own project.

To speak of the “death” of scripture will seem to some readers too
strong; surely already prior to the Reformation the church had argued
violently about scripture, and on this side of the Reformation the Bible
continued to nourish God’s people. When questioned on this, Legaspi says
that from the perspective of Western Christendom, taken as a whole,
“scripture” is no longer catholic after the Reformation. Its “scriptural
parameters” now correspond to communities no longer in communion with
one another. “I take the death of scripture, then,” he says, “to refer
to the fragmentation of community and interpretive authority on a
catholic, church-wide scale.”[^10]

[^10]: Michael Legaspi, email to S. D. Walters, 24 October 2011.

### Questions

Even more important are several larger questions for the church’s
reading and teaching of the Bible. Here I bring this article to a close
with four reflections of my own.

#### Are “biblical studies” suitable to the church’s needs?

Legaspi does not seek to prove continuity between Michaelis’s Göttingen
and Albright’s Hopkins or Cross’s Harvard, but the similarities are so
telling as to obviate that need. Most people with advanced degrees in
biblical studies --- I include myself --- have studied at an enlightenment
university on a curriculum that included (a) Languages, starting with
Hebrew (including the Dead Sea Scrolls), Aramaic, and Greek, and then
the cognate languages and literature --- not now Arabic, but Akkadian,
Egyptian, west Semitic inscriptions, Ugaritic --- scripts and languages
your friends at the high school reunion have never heard of before. (b)
There is a heavy emphasis on history; a former faculty colleague still
remembered snatches of a ditty he and his friends had invented to help
them remember the names of the Assyrian kings in sequence for a seminary
OT exam. (c) Archaeology takes the place of travel literature with its
manners and customs. (d) The biblical texts are understood in tandem
with the critical tradition of literary analysis and history. 

Theological seminaries have usually followed the mood and spirit of this
graduate school model of biblical studies.

Biblical studies as now practiced seems to retain the bias present in
its origin in 18th century Göttingen. But the basic motives for the
discipline’s creation and implementation are inimical to the character
and goals of the church. In Legaspi’s exposition, we hear again and
again of the need to avoid dogmatic conflict (“carefully enforced
irenicism” p 51), to circumvent Christianity as a guiding and motivating
force in university life, to make interpretation of the Bible
“post-confessional,” i.e. secular. Michaelis’s biblical studies was part
of an effort to “disengage biblical interpretation from confessional
paradigms and make a new, cultural Bible shorn of scriptural properties
the centerpiece of an irenic political theology” (6). 

These are worldly and self-advancing goals, the opposite of the way of
the Cross to which Christ calls us; the church should not be guided by
them, and theological instruction should not be encumbered with them.
Hence the headache. 

#### What is scripture?

In Göttingen biblical studies were deemed suitable because they
supported the goals of the university and of the German state.

This suggests that they are questionable within the church because they
conceive of the Bible as something other than the scripture of the
church. If Michaelis reconceived the Bible for the sake of the
university, how shall we re-reconceive of it for the sake of the church? 
*What is scripture?*

##### a.
The church speaks of the Bible’s divine authorship, since it
describes both the dictates of the law and the appeals of the prophets
as coming ultimately from God. Over and over, the law and the prophets
tell us to “do” God’s will as they reveal it to us. The Bible, then, is
a *guide* for the thinking and living of God’s people.

##### b.
The Bible alone gives us access to the words and reports of Jesus;
part of the Holy Spirit’s work is to remind us of “all the things” that
he said to his disciples (John 14:26). Here, and in much else, the Bible
gives us essential *information*.

##### c.
The Bible speaks of itself as *giving life* to God’s people. “I
will never forget your precepts,” says the psalmist, “for by them you
have given me life” (v 93), or, again, “This is my comfort in my
affliction, that your promise gives me life” (v 50). Deuteronomy has a
similar emphasis: Moses tells Israel that the divine law “is no empty
word for you, but your very life” (32:46). We are to put that word,
those words, into our very hearts, teaching them to our children and
making them our very conversation (11:18--20 and elsewhere).

Thus, the biblical writings are primary materials available to the Holy
Spirit to nurture the life of the mind and the spirit, to form us in
keeping with the character and purposes of the Triune God, and to secure
the continuance of the church. In a passage of great power and
pertinence to us, Karl Barth urgently insists that scripture is
essential to the life of the church:

> Without scripture, the church would inevitably dissolve at once into 
> nothingness… From a human standpoint the preservation of the 
> Church depends on the fact that scripture is read, assimilated, 
> expounded and applied in the Church, that this happens tirelessly and 
> repeatedly, that the whole way of the Church consists in its striving
> to hear this concrete witness.[^11]

[^11]: Barth 1956, 688--91.

This (and much more) is what the Bible *is,* and we must interpret it as
such. 

#### What do we mean by “biblical interpretation”?

Legaspi speaks of biblical studies at Göttingen as “…a brief but
consequential moment in which Western biblical interpretation suddenly
seemed to lurch back to life and, unexpectedly, regain its feet” (155).

What is this “Western biblical interpretation”? During all Michaelis’s
decades at Göttingen, the Bible was also being read and studied
elsewhere in more traditional ways, or in un-reinvented ways. It was
received to be a specific guide for Christian belief and practice, and
the reformers themselves --- Luther and Calvin --- encouraged this by their
writings. But there were also others: Simon Patrick, Matthew Henry, and
John Gill[^12] all wrote commentaries on the Bible that were in wide use, and
Michaelis could have read any of them during or after his residence in
England. Like ourselves, these writers were constrained by their times
and their tasks, but their mission in life was to open the church’s
scripture to God’s people. Is this not “biblical interpretation”? Does
not Legaspi replicate the very split he studies?

[^12]: Patrick 1732, Henry 1760, Gill 1763.

He does know this, and speaks of the “scriptural Bible” as 

> the shadowy counterpart to the academic Bible forged during the 
> Enlightenment. Though perhaps only a shade, it has lived on in religious
> communities as long as men and women have revered its authority. A
> full account of the relationship between the scriptural Bible and its
> counterparts is beyond the scope of this work (169). 

Accepted, of course, and without prejudice, but the problematic
relationship between “biblical studies” and the church remains. And to
say, “only a shade,” not only hints at the elitist character of the
enlightenment university and of the discipline of “biblical studies”
within it, but raises the question, Which is the real thing?

“Interpretation” is the explaining of the words of the Bible for the
guidance of God’s people. We should not restrict it to a particular
period or method, e.g., the New Testament’s use of the Old, or the
methods of historical criticism.

#### How do we structure seminary and doctoral programmes?

Finally, I think that the church needs to restructure the study of the
Bible in seminary and doctoral programmes so that they better prepare
students to interpret scripture for the life of God’s people. Consider
the following possibilities.

##### a.
Abandon the term “biblical studies” and return to “scripture.” If we
are going to teach the Old Testament in our seminaries, it should be
taught “as scripture,” since that is our most essential understanding of
the Bible --- and the same if we are going to have doctoral programmes to
train seminary professors.

##### b.
Minimize the importance of secondary literature. This enormous body
of material is the most tangible result of the concept and procedures of
“biblical studies” traced in Michael Legaspi’s book. It often
presupposes the same negative attitudes towards religion, it usually
takes the Bible “as” something other than scripture (viz., literature,
history), it often presupposes a pre-canonical form of the text that
does not actually exist, its purpose is often entangled in a network of
political requirements, its major ideas rarely impinge upon the
Christian life, and its conclusions can seldom be truly proven and are
therefore ultimately ephemeral.

##### c.
Conversely, the curriculum must emphasize the student’s knowledge of
biblical content, gained both by direct study and by lecture and seminar
interaction, and should teach attentiveness to the Bible’s meaning, in
the way Childs illustrates in the sections of his Exodus commentary
subtitled “Old Testament Context.” (Childs 1974) This should include the
distinctive content of the biblical books and of major individual
lections. The flow of history narrated and implied by the Bible is, of
course, important, and must be learned, but it is itself not scripture
and is secondary to the written texts, which have been framed to convey
theological truth. And comprehensive knowledge of the biblical writings
is essential to a hermeneutic under which scripture is interpreted by
scripture.

##### d.
The history of the Bible’s reception must become a major feature of
the instructional and examination process, leading the student to
serious engagement with major interpreters, periods, and styles of
construal. Such study focuses attention on the actual meaning of the
text rather than upon rewriting the text or speculating on its
components and pre-history. It is more important for the church’s OT
scholars to know patristic Greek and Latin than Akkadian and Egyptian.

##### e.
Training in the church’s scripture should give attention to
“exposition” of the biblical text both in preaching and in the church
classroom. “Exegesis” remains the scholar’s technical task, of course,
and the preacher’s vision, but if one follows a church-growth model in
which the primary public congregational gathering has a strong
entertainment component, and discipleship is not a major goal, the
church must find ways to lead people into a life-giving grasp of
scripture. 

##### Finally
Finally, a window on the purpose of biblical scholarship in the church.
I spoke above of names not found in Legaspi’s book. You smiled
tolerantly when I mentioned them --- Matthew Henry, for example --- as I
sometimes do myself when I read him. But he is generally underestimated,
and any preacher would be glad to know as much Greek, Hebrew, and Latin
as Henry does, and to have his gifts of epitome and wit. But my real
point returns to the role of the Bible in the church. I refer to George
Whitefield (1714--70, a contemporary of Michaelis), the preacher most
associated with the spiritual revitalization that swept across England
in the 17th and 18th centuries, ultimately effecting far-reaching social
changes in England’s slave trade, prisons, and industries. 

Whitefield said that he had read through Henry’s *Commentary* four times
--- the last time on his knees.

This is the final reason for studying and teaching scripture: that we
may be searched of the Spirit, repent of our sins, praise and honour the
Triune God, and live out the ways of the covenant in the world of
unbelief. Herein lies the healing not just of the head, but of the human
heart as well. 

Thanks be to God for his Word!


## References

Barth, K. 1956. *The doctrine of the Word of God I.2*. Edinburgh: T. &
T. Clark.

Childs, B. S. 1974. *The book of Exodus*. Philadelphia: Westminster
Press.

Gesenius, W. (A. E. Cowley, editor and translator). 1910. *Gesenius’
Hebrew grammar as edited and enlarged by the late E. Kautzsch*. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Gill, J. 1763. *An exposition of the Old Testament*. London: Printed for
the author.

Henry, M. 1760. *An exposition of the Old and New Testaments in Six
Volumes*. Edinburgh: A. Donaldson and J. Wood.

Kugel, J. L. 1981. *The idea of biblical poetry*. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins.

Lowth, R. 3rd edition 1835. *Lectures on the sacred poetry of the
Hebrews*. London: Thomas Tegg & Son.

Patrick, S. 1732. *A commentary upon the historical books of the Old
Testament.*4th edition*.* London: James and John Knapton, et al.

Sheehan, J. 2005. *The enlightenment bible*. Princeton: University
Press.


