**Scriptural Interpretation and Aesthetic Criticism:**

**William Lowth and Robert Lowth on Isaiah 9:1-7**

****\

Michael C. Legaspi

\

Among those interested in restoring scriptural interpretation to a place
of prominence in the academy, a consensus seems to have emerged. To put
it simply: historical criticism, however one assesses its merits, is
not, by itself, adequate to the task of scriptural reading. On this
view, treatments of the Bible which honor its scriptural authority and
its theological integrity must reject or at least move beyond the effort
to confine the meanings of biblical texts to the varied historical
contexts that gave rise to their constituent parts. This sentiment is a
reasonable one, arising from the recognition that theological readings
depend to a large degree on the attempt to understand discrete parts of
the Bible within a canonical whole. Historical criticism is atomistic:
as a method, it treats scribal errors, editorial layers, historical
personages, textual traditions, authors (named, unnamed, and
pseudonymous) as irreducible units that must be isolated in order to be
understood. Whatever else is made out of these units at some later time
(a Torah scroll, a Psalter, a New Testament, or a Gospel Book for
example) can only be understood from the nature of its historical
‘atoms.’ Theological reading, though, is hylomorphic. It insists that
the Bible is more than the sum of its parts. A theological reading of
the Bible assumes that an understanding of its larger scriptural form
must govern the examination of its parts.

The purpose of this essay is not to defend this characterization of
scriptural reading but rather to take it as a point of departure for a
more specific inquiry: what, if anything, can aesthetic criticism
contribute to scriptural interpretation of the Bible? Historical
criticism is programmatically analytical, dividing the Bible into
smaller units of meaning. But aesthetic criticism shares with scriptural
interpretation (as characterized above) an interest in the strategic
arrangement of words and ideas to produce an effect commensurate with
the overall form of a composition. It would seem, then, to offer a more
promising—or perhaps less contrary—interpretive mode to theological
interpreters. To test this supposition, I propose to compare the ways
that a theologically minded interpreter and an aesthetically motivated
one treat the same biblical passage. Isaiah 9 is particularly well
suited to such a comparison. As a key messianic text in a book that, in
Christian tradition, has been called with justice the “fifth gospel,”
Isaiah 9 occupies a theologically exalted position. It frames a vision
of the Messiah—a peerless, triumphant son of God—that ramifies
throughout the book of Isaiah and the entire Christian theological
tradition. This prominence no doubt has something to do with the *way*
the oracle is presented: in lyrical, elevated language characteristic of
Isaiah as a whole. Because theological significance and literary mastery
coincide in the book of Isaiah, the famous oracle of chapter nine
presents a useful test case for the comparative examination of the two
interpretive modes. The theological and the aesthetic are, of course,
not mutually exclusive. Yet, for English and German Romantics of the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, aesthetic criticism
(especially the study of biblical poetry) *did* emerge as a replacement
for confessional modes of reading oriented explicitly toward the
overarching theological framework of the Old and New Testaments. A close
look at the way two similar yet different interpreters from this period
treated a single passage may shed light on this momentous shift and,
secondarily, on the relation between aesthetic criticism and theological
interpretation broadly construed.

\

THE INVENTION OF BIBLICAL POETRY

Englishman Robert Lowth, eighteenth-century bishop first of Oxford and
then of London, is best known for his work on parallelism, the literary
feature that, in the eyes of many, unlocked the mystery of Hebrew poetic
genius. By the term “parallelism,” Lowth indicated a specific feature of
biblical compositions, a way biblical writers had of coordinating short
one-line sentences in meaningful pairs or, less commonly, triads; as he
put it: “When a proposition is delivered, a second is subjoined to it,
or drawn under it, equivalent, or contrasted with it, in Sense; or
similar to it in the form of Grammatical Construction; these I call
Parallel Lines; and the words, or phrases, answering one to another in
corresponding Lines, Parallel Terms.” This simple, technical description
hardly seems revolutionary—and yet, for complicated reasons, it was.
James Kugel exaggerates only a little when he says that Lowth’s
presentation of biblical parallelism “conquered the world.” Offered as a
somewhat tentative characterization of “Hebrew poetry” in his celebrated
Oxford lectures of the 1740s, Lowth’s parallelistic doctrine appeared in
clear, definitive form in his 1779 annotated translation of the book of
Isaiah. Within a generation, Lowthian parallelism had made it possible
to rescue the prophetic books from what eighteenth-century progressives
regarded as a deeply unpromising dilemma: that the prophets were either
an aesthetic and moral embarrassment, their writings riddled with
vulgarities and obscurities and bogged down by tedious repetition, or
they were simply vessels for torrents of divine wrath sprinkled now and
again with occasional references to the messiah. In other words, the
choice fell between reading the prophets as second-rate literature,
inferior to Horace and Pindar, or as second-rate theology, inferior to
Paul and Jesus. With the discovery of parallelism, though, Lowth hit
upon a powerful argument for vindicating the literary merit of the
Hebrew prophets: they could not be judged by neoclassical canons of
eloquence and, more importantly, meter, because the genius of *Hebrew*
poetry was profoundly different from the classical one. It lay precisely
in its raw imagery, forceful repetition, sharp contrasts, and terse
language. Judged by their own genius, prophetic writings were seen to
open a direct, turbulent path to sublimity that was, in fact, superior
to the winding road of balanced meter and witty circumlocution that led
only, in classical poetry, to refined forms of enjoyment and moral
edification. What James Macpherson, ‘translator’ of Ossian, was doing to
contemporary conceptions of poetry from a mythologized Scots-Gaelic
past, Lowth did from the depths of a hoary Hebrew antiquity. Both men
sought to recover an authentically ancient poetics of feeling that
tunneled underneath the dominant critical canons. With Lowth’s help,
Isaiah and company now stood on their own, not merely as prophets but
also as persons, who, to Romantic sensibilities, were far nobler. The
prophets became poets.

This shift was momentous. On the one hand, it gave biblical interpreters
new critical purchase on the prophetic writings, allowing the likes of
J. G. Herder, J. D. Michaelis, and J. G. Eichhorn to frame them in
literary as well as historical categories. Where historical criticism of
the prophets allowed a more general contextualization of prophetic
literature, Lowthian poetics opened new angles on authorial intent and
the texture of biblical language. On the other hand, parallelism fit
admirably a need to develop modes of exegesis that could illuminate and
commend the Bible without recourse to Christian doctrine or confessional
frameworks. But, as might be expected, there was a theological price to
be paid. To understand Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel principally as
*prophets* is to locate them within a canonical framework that extends,
in one direction, to the Law and, in another, to the New Testament, thus
allowing scripture to be read holistically as an internally variegated
but nevertheless unified witness to the reality of divine redemption. To
insist that the prophets be read above all as poets, though, was to
introduce a new interpretive category that jarred with traditional
exegesis. 

James Kugel’s introductory article in his 1990 edited volume, *Poetry
and Prophecy: The Beginnings of a Literary Tradition*, offers a subtly
provocative discussion of the issue. Certainly, Kugel points out, the
category of poetry fell outside the scope of rabbinic interpretation.
For the rabbis, divine inspiration precluded the notion that “human
artifice is responsible for even one word of scripture.” The rabbis, for
example, note that Deborah is demoted from prophetess to songstress (Jud
5:12) after arrogantly announcing that she had arisen as a “mother in
Israel” (Jud 5:7); David, too, is punished for referring to sacred
statutes as ‘songs’ in Ps 119:54. By contrast, Hellenized Jews and early
Church fathers saw poetic inspiration as a divine gift. Philo
appropriated an older, traditional understanding of prophecy as a form
of divine possession and referred to Hebrew prophets as examples. In a
parallel move, Clement pointed to truths embedded in sibylline oracles,
Lactantius endorsed the theism of Orpheus, and Augustine used Virgil’s
Fourth Eclogue to apologetical advantage. They did so, Kugel argues,
because of a long-standing association in pagan antiquity between poetry
and divine inspiration. Truths belonged to ancient poets *as poets*,
whether pagan or not, making them, in effect, prophetic figures. Kugel
then moves, somewhat abruptly, from this pointy prelude to a brief
précis of Lowth’s definitive identification of prophecy with poetry. The
effect is to impute guilt by association, to assign responsibility for a
modern category mistake to Lowth’s classical and Christian heritage. 

I may be over-reading Kugel’s essay, finding a polemical thrust where
there is none. But the juxtaposition of patristic endorsement of pagan
poetry with Lowth’s effort to turn prophecy into poetry is nevertheless
suggestive. I have argued elsewhere that talk of “poets” and “poetry” in
the modern context is part of a larger defection from scriptural and
theological categories. Indeed, I think this is the reason why Lowthian
poeticization has proven so generative and durable within modern
critical frameworks. The question here, though, is whether some concept
of biblical poetry might play a constructive role in Christian
theological reading. Is it possible, for example, that an effort to keep
one’s eye trained on the *res* of scripture—the reality to which
scripture bears witness—might be enhanced by the recognition that
portions of scripture are poetic? To explore this question, I will
compare Lowth’s annotated translation of Isaiah 9 to the work of closely
related interpreter, whose commentary on Isaiah exemplifies an
explicitly scriptural and theological interpretation of Isaiah: Robert
Lowth’s father, William Lowth. 

\

TWO INTERPRETIVE FRAMEWORKS

William Lowth was born in 1660 and died in 1732. His lifetime coincided
with a period of deep anxiety about the credibility of scripture, one in
which the work of critics like Anthony Collins and Jean Le Clerc had
begun to erode confidence in traditional views of the Bible. William,
who had been educated at Oxford (St. John’s College), held a
conservative position in ongoing hermeneutical debates. In 1692, he
wrote a defense of the Bible called *Vindication of the Divine Authority
of the Old and New Testaments*. Shortly thereafter, in 1696, he became
chaplain to the bishop of Winchester. Continuing in an earlier vein, he
wrote in 1708 *Directions for the Profitable Reading of the Holy
Scriptures*, a work that appeared in at least seven editions between
1708 and 1799. Finally, in 1712, he published a commentary on Isaiah,
which would later become part of a larger series on the prophets. Robert
was born to William and his wife Margaret Pitt in 1710, after William
had built his reputation as a learned defender of orthodoxy.

Before looking at William’s treatment of the royal oracle in Isaiah 9,
it will be useful to look at his 1708 guide to reading the Bible. The
general tone of the work is apologetic. William’s chief concern in this
work is to answer objections and to clear away the “little cavils and
exceptions of the skepticks and infidels.” Though hostile to what he
refers to repeatedly as “popish” recourse to the authority of a
magisterium, he is more interested here in checking the skeptical,
anarchic, and sectarian impulses of self-appointed critics. William’s
main strategy for doing this is to insist on a learned reverence for the
Bible as a coherent, scriptural whole and to show that, from the
perspective of a kind of hermeneutical docility, standard objections to
the style and substance of the Bible fall away. For William, the
principal subject of the Bible is what he calls the “mystery of our
redemption” in Christ. Moreover, this redemption is faithfully expressed
by doctrine that subsumes the entirety of the scriptural witness. As he
says succinctly: “The histories shew the completion of the prophecies;
the prophecies confirm the truth of the histories; and both of them
prove the divine authority of the doctrine.” In this way, William
recognizes unity and complementarity among parts of the scriptural
canon, such that they form a harmonic whole. The burden on Bible
readers, then, is to understand this whole. Just as students of any
subject must approach that subject with “deference” and “resignation of
judgment” if they are to understand it, Bible readers must come to terms
with a canonical whole and refrain from judging parts in isolation from
one another. In making this point, William is especially cognizant of
the prophetic writings, which manage to offend by being at once too
plain (as he says “unartificial”) in their style and too obscure in
their content. But once the scope of salvation history is understood
from this histories and the biblical doctrine clarified by the Gospels
and Epistles, the perils of unintelligibility are mitigated and the
problematic style of the prophets becomes not only acceptable but
indispensable. As William says: the prophetic style is able to
“recommend it self to the greatest matters of eloquence, and withal very
proper to inspire the minds of attentive readers with noble ideas of the
divine wisdom and providence, suitable to the greatness of those sublime
truths which are there discover’d to us.” By raising the rhetorical
pitch, the prophets elevate, in an appropriate way, the mystery of
redemption. But by reading their message within a doctrinal framework,
readers of the Bible avoid the conclusion that the prophets are
unacceptably obscure and indelicate. Without a canonical control, so to
speak, the reader might be justified in criticizing the prophetic
writings. But, when one approaches the scripture with an appropriate
sense of how scripture functions, these criticisms fall away. For this
reason, William specifies in the *Directions* that Bible readers follow,
in order, four rules: 1) to begin with the clearer parts of the Bible
and move to the less clear (the former include most of the New
Testament, the Psalms, and the “practical writings” of the Old
Testament; the latter include Daniel, Ezekiel, and Revelation); 2) “to
have regard for the analogy of faith in the reading and interpreting of
the scriptures”; 3) to interpret scripture with scripture; and 4) to
maintain “an especial regard to the practice and usage of the first and
purest ages of the Church, and those that were nearest the times of the
Apostles.” These guidelines indicate, further, that William reserved for
the Church, bearer and witness to the mystery of redemption, an
important role in scriptural interpretation. In other words, his
approach is practical and methodical, and his interpretive horizon
doctrinal and ecclesial.

How does this bear out in interpretive practice? To answer this
question, I turn now to his 1712 commentary on Isaiah, where we make an
exciting discovery. As far as I know, scholars working on Robert Lowth
have not consulted his father’s commentary on Isaiah in order to trace
the roots of Robert’s famous work. But when we do, we see,
interestingly, that William’s strategy for interpreting Isaiah is the
coordination of Isaian materials to various *parallels*. William, as it
turns out, was as enthusiastic about parallels as Robert was. As we
might expect, William’s parallelism is very different, and instructively
so. At a key moment in the preface, when William justifies the writing
of yet another commentary on Isaiah, he offers the following statement: 

And he [i.e. William Lowth himself] is willing to believe that if he
hath given any new Light to the obscure and difficult Passages of this
Prophet, it is chiefly by comparing the Phrase and Idiom of the Text
with other parallel Places more exactly, than hath been hitherto done by
any Commentator upon this Prophet that he hath seen: And he desires the
Reader, that when he finds a more than ordinary difficulty, he would
carefully consider the parallel Texts there referred to, which to have
set down at length would have enlarged this Work beyond its due Bounds.

\

In defending this parallelistic strategy, William is careful to point
out that his intention is not simply to separate Isaiah from his words
and to import those words into an alien doctrinal framework woven from a
disparate collection of biblical verses. He sees himself as an
explicator, above all, of the literal sense of the prophet. At the same
time, though, he cannot approve of “the Opinion of some learned Men, who
are for cramping the Sense of the Prophets, and confining it within as
narrow a Compass as they can, and will needs maintain that the Prophets
scarce foresaw any Thing but what was to come to pass in or near their
own Time.” William sees no rigid dichotomy between the literal sense and
the mystical sense, since the mystical sense, for him, is not mystical
simply because it is non-literal or non-obvious. Rather, it is mystical
because it refers to the mystery of redemption clarified by the Gospel,
and often this “mystical” sense answers more directly to the “natural
and genuine Import of the words than any other interpretations that can
be given of them.” This is, according to William, precisely the way that
the evangelists and apostles identified the mystical sense of prophetic
writings. They did not opportunistically invent secondary meanings for
the scripture; rather, they recognized “Providential Congruities between
the Times of the Old and New Testaments” that rendered the events of
their, latter days theologically intelligible. Isaiah, then, is an
extraordinarily rich book because the prophet was favored by God with
what William calls “an entire View of the Gospel State, from the very
Birth of the Messias, to that glorious Period, when the Kingdoms of the
World shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ.” The
sense of the prophet emerges from scriptural parallels, but, for
William, the sense is rooted in Isaiah’s *vision* as strongly as it is
in Isaiah’s *interpreters*.

What, then, of Robert’s annotated translation of Isaiah? As in most
father-son relations, it is possible in the case of the two Lowths to
observe both influence from and reaction against the father by the son.
Considering their similar educational backgrounds and professional
trajectories, Robert might also be described, like his father, as a
learned clergyman. Yet this would convey the wrong idea. Robert was
extremely learned, running a very formidable gauntlet of classical
training at St. Mary’s school in Winchester and later at New College.
And he was indeed a clergyman, entering the Church, as his father did
after studying at Oxford. Robert, a much more astute political operator
than his father, even rose through the ranks to become bishop of London.
Yet, unlike his father, Robert had very little interest in theology. He
knew more about how to skirt theology than how to expound it. He opens
two of his most famous works, the lectures on Hebrew poetry and the
translation of Isaiah, with polite apologies for talking about the Bible
while ignoring theology. For example, he suggests in the second lecture
on Hebrew poetry, that his purpose is to explore “the ample field of
poetry” while tiptoeing past what he calls the “sacred boundaries of
theology.” Lowth sounds the same note in the preface to his Isaiah
translation, albeit much more confidently, when he declares that all
interpretation, theological or otherwise, depends upon the translator
and his or her ability to deliver faithfully the literal sense:

The first and principal business of a Translator is to give the plain
literal and grammatical sense of his author; the obvious meaning of his
words, phrases, and sentences, and to express them in the language into
which he translates, as far as may be, in equivalent words, phrases, and
sentences… For whatever senses are supposed to be included in the
Prophet’s words, Spiritual, Mystical, Allegorical, Analogical or the
like, they must all intirely depend on the Literal sense. This is the
only foundation upon which such interpretations can be securely raised;
and if this is not firmly and well established, all that is built upon
it will fall to the ground.

\

To anyone interested in a theological reading, Lowth blandly notes the
existence of a host of anonymous “learned expositors to whom he may have
recourse.” There is, then, a large and important difference between
Robert and William when it comes to their general interpretive
attitudes.

To get at a second, even more important distinction, though, we must
first note a basic similarity. Like his father, Robert worked from
apologetic motives. As he made clear in the lectures on Hebrew poetry,
he saw no reason why the Bible should suffer in comparisons with
classical literature. Coming from someone as knowledgeable and
enthusiastic about Greek and Latin poetry as Robert was, this was a
substantial judgment. The Hebrew prophets, he argued, had a stronger
claim to the title of ‘poet’ than Horace, Pindar, and all the rest. As I
noted earlier, Robert saw in the literary effusions of the prophets a
shorter and more direct path to the sublime than he saw in pagan poetry.
Both William and Robert, then, sought to defend the Bible by moving
toward, not away from its linguistic particularity. The most convenient
term for this particularity was a traditional one—the “literal
sense”—and both men championed it, albeit in different ways. The key
difference is in how the literal sense was conceived and contextualized.
Both seized upon the idea of “parallels” to construe biblical language
in a meaningful and responsible way. For William, these parallels arced
out of the scripture, radiating by way of “providential congruities” out
of a doctrinal center. Robert’s parallels, though, were formal and
literary. They did not organize conceptually the variegated witness of
the biblical authors; they structured the way in which those authors
communicated. This distinctive *way* of communicating functioned, in
turn, as the interpretive key to a sensibility that restored the
prophets to their original splendor as poetic geniuses, witnesses not to
the mystery of redemption but to the ineffability of the sublime.

It will be helpful to make one more point explicit before looking at an
example from Isaiah 9. Robert called the preface that he attached to his
translation of Isaiah a “preliminary dissertation.” At seventy-four
pages, the title is apt. Its principal subject is not the book of Isaiah
but a defense of Lowth’s interpretive program. It includes an extensive
explanation, replete with examples, of parallelism in its synonymous,
antithetical, and synthetic forms. Lowth recommends parallelism here as
a powerful antidote to lexicographic confusion, since it often places
words in apposition. When one word is known, the parallel word can often
be puzzled out. Following this recommendation is something of a
text-critical manifesto very much in line with contemporary
neohumanistic currents: stop relying on the Masoretes; make comparative
use of multiple manuscripts (for example, in Kennicott’s variorum
edition); consult ancient versions judiciously; and emend when
necessary. Robert offers these guidelines in a way that is reminiscent
of his father, as though equipping the reader to employ good sense and
judgment against skeptics. William employed scriptural holism against
heretics and schismatics; Robert, for his part, uses parallelism to
outflank credulous Hebraists and hyper-critical philologists alike. Seen
against this backdrop, Robert’s annotated translation of Isaiah looks
more like a critical experiment focused on method than it does an
attempt to come to terms with Isaiah as a book of scripture. And if by
scriptural interpretation we mean attention to a canonical whole, a rule
of faith, or to the guidance of the Fathers—essential elements in
William’s *Directions* for reading the Bible—then Robert’s work must be
seen as programmatically non-scriptural.

\

ISAIAH 9:1-7

On, then, to a brief look at how both dealt with a specific passage:
Isaiah 9:1-7. First of all, it is important to note that William, in his
commentary, works directly with the Authorized Version. This is not to
say that he ignored the Hebrew; far from it. Yet it does testify to the
basic, ecclesial character of his enterprise. Robert, by contrast,
nursed the hope that his own translation of the Bible would one day
replace the AV, which he regarded as inadequate. Thus Robert’s work
includes not just a commentary but a translation as well.

In his commentary, William’s strategy is to make as many explicit
connections between the Isaian oracles and their scriptural parallels as
possible. According to William, portrayals of the first and second
comings of Christ are often joined together in the prophets. What we
have in Isaiah 9, then, is a string, not of verses, but of smaller
exegetical motifs that William connects to passages elsewhere in Isaiah,
in Luke, Matthew, and the book of Revelation. As William sees it, the
oracle proceeds in a linear and economical fashion, sounding notes and
presenting images to the reader that beg for clarification by way of
connection to parallel texts. The first image is “light”: “the people
that walked in darkness have seen a great light” (Is 9:2). William does
not understand this reference to light as a flexible metaphor, a
concrete word signifying any of several abstract phenomena, such as the
illumination of the law in Ps 119 or the benevolence of God when he is
called in James the “father of lights.” The motif is more specific: it
is the *movement*from darkness to light, the redemptive breaking in of
light on darkness at God’s initiative, not “light” understood generally.
For this reason, William notes four scriptural parallels for Is 9:2: 1)
Is 60:1, which describes the glory of the Lord as it shines on the
“gross darkness of the people”; 2) the song of Zechariah in Luke 1 in
which he describes the arrival of the “dayspring from on high”; 3) the
mission of Paul as described by Jesus in Acts 26:18, to turn the
Gentiles from darkness to light and from Satan to God; and 4) the
description of the church in 1 Pet 2:9 as a royal priesthood, a holy
nation called out of darkness into God’s marvelous light. Understood as
an instance of the redemptive light motif, the verse in Isaiah is taken
up into a larger discourse about the conversion of the nations to God
and the experience of that conversion as dramatically and self-evidently
good. It does not stand on its own, with only the reader’s experience of
light to fill out a rather indeterminate metaphor.

As the light of salvation shines out in 9:3, it enlarges and multiplies
the nation. Here William points to the growth of the Church as the
Gentiles accept the Gospel. According to Isaiah, this growth is attended
by joy. An interesting sidenote is that both William and Robert make an
emendation here, altering the negative particle *lō’* “not” to the
prepositional phrase *lô* “to him.” William offers two scriptural
parallels for the “joy of the harvest” that Isaiah invokes here, one in
Is 16, the other in Ps 4. But his real interest is in the additional
comparison of this joy to the joy, not of harvest, but to the jubilation
of victors dividing the spoil. As with the example of the movement from
light to darkness, the reference to dividing the spoil is not a simple
apposition but a specific exegetical motif. Who, in Isaiah, is in a
position to “divide the spoil”? William points to the Servant Song in Is
53, where, in v. 12, God declares the man of sorrows victorious after he
has made himself an offering for the sin of the people. God assigns him
a portion with the great and makes him “divide the spoil with the
strong.” William does not expound the Is 53 verse; he simply cites it.
Yet this is surely enough to connect the motif to Jesus. From here,
William moves to Luke 11:21-22: “when a strong man armed keepeth his
palace, his goods are in peace: but when a stronger than he shall come
upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from him all the armour wherein he
trusted, and divideth the spoils.” William explains that the strong man
in Jesus’ statement is Satan, who usurped authority over mankind and
kept the human race in bondage to himself. Jesus, then, is the one who
overcomes the strong man, disarms him, and divides the spoils. The joy
envisioned by Isaiah has very specific contours, because it is the kind
of joy that follows the division of the spoil—but, again, it is not any
division of spoil but, more specifically, the reassignment of goods by
one whose rightful authority to disarm the ruling powers has been
demonstrated by his own willingness to suffer shame, loss, and
humiliation.

The next motif that William engages is fire. Is 9:5 is a difficult
verse, reading in the Authorized Version: “For every battle of the
warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this
shall be with burning and fuel of fire.” Like Robert, William spends
more attention on 9:5 than on any other verse in the passage. It is the
linchpin of the oracle. The subject of the first clause, *sə’ôn sō’ēn*,
is a hapax, translated in the AV as the “battle of the warrior”; this is
also what one finds in the Vulgate (*violenta praedatio*). In both
translations, then, the phrase has an abstract meaning guessed from
context, which is paired with the noun phrase, *śimlâ məgôlālâ ḇəḏāmîm*
“garment rolled in blood.” Both noun phrases, one abstract and the other
quite concrete, are linked to the prepositional phrase *bəra‘aš* “in
tumult,” so that the warrior’s battle and the garment rolled in blood
are both characterized here as features of human battle. When men go to
battle and shed blood, they do so *bəra‘aš*, attended by noise, chaos,
and struggle. The rest of the verse follows after the *atnah* under
*ḇəḏāmîm*. Influenced by the Masoretic division, the translators of the
AV understood the second part of this verse *disjunctively*, translating
the vav reversive as an adversative: “*but* this shall be with burning
and fuel of fire.” This raises the question: this *what* shall be with
burning? William makes it clear that the unstated subject of the second
part of the verse is an altogether different sort of battle: not the
battle of men going to war, but the eschatological battle of God against
the wicked. William cites two NT texts to this effect: 2 Thess 1:7,
which says that the “Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not
God,” and Revelation 20, which explains that fire will come down from
heaven to consume Satan’s armies just before Satan himself is cast into
the lake of fire. The point of verse 5, then, is to connect the
climactic outworking of divine vengeance to the appearance of a royal
Messiah. The burning of fire is understood in William’s commentary in a
way that connects the Isaian verse to parallel instances of fire
understood, specifically, as the final destruction of God’s enemies in
the great sorting of the nations.

William described his own method as illumination by parallel. As we have
seen, his parallels depend not simply on the linking of metaphors or
words but rather on the coordination of exegetical motifs. Robert’s
parallelism works very differently. It is a decidedly local phenomenon,
a literary technique that governs phrases in close proximity with one
another. One reason Robert made such a close and extensive study of the
book of Isaiah is that it offers some of the clearest and most elegant
examples of this technique. The Hebrew text of Isaiah 9 is certainly
amenable to parallelization, but Robert has to work a little to pull it
off, departing often from the AV. In the AV, the oracle feels linear,
moving forward briskly—even careening a bit—unfolding a series of motifs
that culminate in the birth of a messianic royal figure with a profusion
of extraordinary titles. By contrast, Robert’s rendering is all evenness
and balance, with lines scrupulously offset, small breaks indicated by
commas, larger ones by semicolons, and full lines by periods. In the AV,
the reader is forced to climb a jagged hill; in Robert’s translation, he
waltzes on a parquet floor; he does not take the next step without
bringing both feet together.

Robert has no qualms about understanding Is 9 as messianic. In his
outline of the book, he says that the passage refers to “the
manifestation of Messiah, the transcendent dignity of his character; and
the universality and eternal duration of his kingdom.” William would
certainly have accepted this characterization, and he would have found
Robert’s translation compatible with and supportive of it. The greatest
difference between Robert’s translation and the AV, as we have noted, is
essentially typographic. But the imposed parallelistic structure was
influential in other ways as well. One example is 9:1 (Hebrew 8:23).
Robert was programmatically committed to setting out two-part poetic
parallels in which the parts relate as synonyms, antitheses, or elements
of a single synthetic idea. Perhaps because of the opposing words
*ri’šôn* and *’aḥǝrôn* 

in 9:1, Robert sees an antithesis between the “debasement” of Zebulon
and Naphtali in the former time and the “making glorious” of the same
region, “the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations” in
the latter time. Thus, Robert’s translation:

But there shall not hereafter be darkness in the land which was
distressed:

In the former time he debased the land of Zebulon, and the land of
Naphtali;

But in the latter time he hath made it glorious:

Even the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations.

\

In the AV, there is a subtler distinction between the light affliction
of the northern territories and the later, grievous affliction of the
same region; what follows, then, in subsequent verses apparently has
nothing to do with these former Israelite territories, once humbled by
Assyria; the hopeful oracle has to do, rather, with the territories of
Judah. William, in his commentary, endorses this reading. Robert,
however, sees in this verse an antithetical parallelism contrasting the
earlier judgment on the north with its later glorification. The
glorification he has in mind is the ministry of Jesus; he actually
states in the note to 8:23 that the territories around Galilee “were the
first that enjoyed the blessing of Christ’s preaching the Gospel, and
exhibiting his miraculous works among them.”

Robert’s parallelistic program, then, does not rule out the possibility
that the Hebrew poets anticipated a messianic figure and a messianic
age. Neither does it rule out the possibility that New Testament writers
connected portrayals of Jesus to the Hebrew scriptures in suggestive or
opportunistic ways. But Robert’s first loyalty is to the prophets as
poets; therefore, a proper understanding of their writings is
constrained by what can be plausibly taken to furnish the poetic
imagination of ancient Israelite author. Whatever else is made of them,
the words of Isaiah must, under the guidance of skillful translation and
criticism, be ascertained correctly before interpreters can do anything
else to them. Though certainly a reasonable sentiment, this brings us
immediately to the question of how we are permitted to construe the
literal sense. By what critical canons are we allowed to conceive what
Robert calls the original “sense” of the author? It is in response to
*this* question, I believe, that Robert’s quest for the genius of
biblical poetry takes its bearings. The reasoning is as follows. It is
incumbent upon the interpreter to reckon with “an exact and faithful
representation of the words and of the sense of the Prophet, by adhering
closely to the letter of the text, and treading as nearly as may be in
his footsteps” while accounting, at the same time, for “the air and
manner of the author… the form and fashion of the composition.” The
prophets write in a “prophetical style” that resembles poetic
compositions in many respects such as unusual vocabulary, morphology,
and syntax. Robert’s conclusion, then, is that an accurate understanding
of the prophets depends upon the discernment of a literary technique.
William’s interpretive strategy was material; Robert’s is almost purely
formal.

In Is 9, the drive toward parallelistic balance has its most dramatic
effect in verse 5, the same verse that drew the attention of William.
William accepted the wording of the AV, which translated *ḵōl-sə’ôn
sō’ēn* as “every battle of the warrior.” He went on, as we have seen, to
draw a contrast between the tumult of human battle and the fiery
totality of divine judgment. Robert, though, derides the AV translation
as guesswork. Parallelism demands that *sə’ôn sō’ēn* be parallel to the
neighboring phrase, the “garment rolled in blood,” and, given the next
line, both have to be suitable for “burning” and for use as “fuel for
the fire.” Thus, it cannot be something abstract like the “battle of the
warrior”; it has to be something specific that can be burned. On the
basis of a Syriac parallel (*sûnā*, “shoe” or “sandal”), Robert argues
that the hapax must indicate some kind of footwear. Considering the
context, he translates *sə’ôn sō’ēn* as “the greaves of the armed
warrior.” (Lowth’s reading is affirmed by the great majority of modern
English translations, which tend to have “boot” or as RSV has it “the
boot of the tramping warrior.”) Once the parallel between greaves and
bloody garments has been established, the two are taken as fuel for the
fire. Recall that in the AV, the relation between noisy, bloody battle
and fire was disjunctive: human battle is noisy but divine battle is
fiery. In Robert’s translation, the four semantic units in verse 5 form
a continuous sentence: 

For the greaves of the armed warrior in the conflict,

And the garment rolled in much blood,

Shall be for a burning, even fuel for the fire.

What, then, to make of this image? According to Robert, this is an
instance of an ancient custom: “the burning of heaps of armour, gathered
from the field of battle, as an offering made to the god supposed to be
the giver of victory.” To support this interpretation, Robert cites two
examples from Roman history: a medal struck by Vespasian which shows the
goddess of peace holding an olive branch in one hand and, with the
other, setting a heap of armour on fire; and a verse from the Aeneid, in
which Evander refers to past triumphs as the time when he burnt the
shields of his enemies. He also cites Ps 46:9 (“He maketh wars to cease,
even to the end of the land: he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear
in sunder; and burneth the chariots in fire.” Finally, he cites the
intemperate imagination of Ezekiel, who in 39:9-10 says that Israel’s
victory over Gog and Magog will take place on so grand a scale that the
Israelites will be able to use the shields and weapons of their defeated
enemies for firewood for seven years. This single note on the burning of
the implements of war occupies about two pages in the notes of Robert’s
commentary. He, however, has almost nothing to say about the famous
epithets in verses 6 and 7.

In all this, Robert makes the messianic oracle of Isaiah 9 a hopeful
look toward some future age of peace, when one side enforces peace by
defeating the other. In wanting an end to war, Isaiah takes his place
beside the psalmist and Ezekiel, but he also stands beside imperial
propagandists and secular peaceniks.  For all of Robert’s avowed
interest in restoring the literal sense of a specific author, his
version of the Isaian oracle recedes into an unhelpful generality.
William’s strategy, as we have seen, was to find scriptural parallels
that illuminate the verse within the framework of salvation history.
This led to a highly differentiated reading that coordinated the literal
sense with points on a trajectory extending from the prophetic period to
the time of Christ and, finally, to his triumphant reappearance.
Robert’s version of the literal sense, though, anchors a movement toward
a different hermeneutical horizon: not the confessionally particular
landscape of providential figures but the whole universe of poetic
sensibility. In this, Robert recreates for the reader an affective,
uninstructed encounter with a text populated by open-ended metaphors.
Robert’s translation of Isaiah is a bid to re-hear the scriptures with
new receptivity to their poetic character, but, because “poetry” is a
formal category rather than a material one, it can only clarify the
*res* of scripture by introducing interpretive rules that purchase a
certain verbal clarity at the cost of a larger scriptural coherence.

\

CONCLUSION

In the case of the two Lowths, poetic and theological readings result
from divergent interpretive strategies. As a characterization of a
particular historical moment belonging to the Enlightenment encounter
with the Bible, “divergence,” I think, is apt. But the historical
argument need not entail a theological rejection of the category of
biblical poetry. As Kugel points out, the identification of prophecy
with poetry has deep Christian roots. Whatever the limits of Lowthian
criticism, this point is important to remember. I believe there is a
sense in which the categories of “poetry” and the “poetic” may enhance
theological reading. As a rather fine poet himself, Robert Lowth
understood the distinctive genius of Hebrew poetry to operate in the
charged space that separates the concrete realia of human experience
from the sublime truths and realities of which we are, most of the time,
only dimly aware. There is something generative—and metaphysically
appropriate—in a spirituality that does not leap over the quiddity of
the world. Poetry dignifies the world of particulars, the world on a
human scale, while creating room for those particulars to engender
participation in the unseen realities that ultimately make those
particulars what they are. One is reminded, for example, of the liturgy.
Surely the words of the liturgy are more than poetry, just as the icons
of the Church are more than art. Yet it does the prophets no disservice
to attend to their words concretely, even minutely, while standing
before a God who cannot be contained by those words. To hear the
prophetic writings liturgically is to hear them, in a way, as poetry.
Just as ordinary things—buildings, bodies, voices, bread and wine—are
taken up into a transcendent frame of reference in the liturgy, poetry
shrinks and crystallizes language, humbles it, in order to extend its
reach. And just as the liturgy is not a dispensable form, poetry teaches
us that, this side of the *parousia*, we will never outgrow the
smallness of words.
